In scientific computing
performance is quite important.
You want to study
bigger systems.
You want to study more
sophisticated interactions,
whatever.
So you care about performance
and you try to improve it.
Many programmers
go about doing that
by trying to imagine what the
bottlenecks and the hot spots
in their application are.
And try to improve on those.
But that might not
be the best approach.
This application simulates
a cellular automaton.
So it gets some arguments
from the command line,
like the specific rule which
updates the cells in the automaton
the number of cells it has,
and the maximum number of steps
we want to take when we
simulate this automaton.
We call the function
init_automaton.
And that will create a new
automaton which is initialized.
And which has the
rule number which was
specified on the command line.
We just print the rules.
And we print the automaton
for good measure.
And then we start updating
the automaton step by step
until we reach the
maximum number of steps
supplied on the command line.
So in each iteration we step the
automaton forward by one step.
So we update all the cells
according to the rules
and we also print the automaton.
When we build and run
this application as you
can see we get some
pretty pictures.
You get these nice
patterns which are cute.
If we want to deal with a very
large automaton then probably
we need to do something
about the performance.
And if we look at the
code there are some things
which we obviously can do.
For instance in the
init_automaton function
there is a do-loop,
an explicit do-loop
that initializes the cells
of the automaton one by one.
And it probably is not the
fastest way of doing this.
So that's already one
opportunity for optimization.
Also in step_automaton
we might be
able to do smarter things
than are done here.
So for instance it might help
to just use an additional array
in order to store the
new values of the cells
rather than updating
the existing
one using this left and
last_right, variables,
and so on.
So that could be
an avenue as well.
And of course there is
the apply_rule function
which multiplies
by factors of two
and perhaps bit shifting
would be faster.
So again perhaps opportunities
for optimization.
However before starting
to change the code
and trying to improve
the performance
it's better to actually measure
where our computational time is
spent.
And that's very easy to
achieve by using a profiler.
So we prepare a programme
for profiling with gprof.
We just add the -pg
flag both for linking
and for compilation.
And for good measure
we also use -g
to add debugging information.
Once that's done you just
run your programme as usual.
It will take a while.
It's best to have a multi
seconds run in order to ensure
that the normal behaviour of
this application is measured.
So this was with rule
90 on the 100,000 cells
and 500 iterations, 500 steps.
We can now examine the profile
using the gprof command
and the name of the
application, which was profiled.
The profile is a
list of procedures
that were called
by our application
and they are ordered
from those that
took the most time to those
that took the least time.
So most prominent
is print_automaton
and that used more than two
thirds of the entire execution
time of the application.
Second comes apply_rule
which took approximately 18%.
So that means that
unless we improve
the performance
of print_automaton
we don't stand a chance
to reduce the computation
time by more than one third.
The init_automaton procedure
actually takes hardly any time
at all.
So improving its
performance will
have absolutely no influence
on the overall performance
of our application.
The profile is quite useful.
It shows a number of things.
So the total execution time in
the first column and then also
the cumulative time
which can also be useful.
Also self seconds
is quite interesting
because that's the time
spent in the procedure
itself, not in those that
procedure is calling.
And a number of calls can
also be quite informative.
So for instance, our
apply_rule procedure
is called very many times.
It can also help
to find some bugs.
Because if there are more
or less calls to a procedure
than you would expect,
you have a chance
to figure that out here.
Often intuition is
really not your friend
when it comes to computational
performance and efficiency.
It's much better to
actually measure performance
to identify hot spots and
bottlenecks before diving
in and spending significant
time trying to improve
the performance of your code.
Of course there are much
better tools than gprof
So if you have access to those
you should really use them.